Welcome to the lab
Welcome to the lab, and thank you for participating in today’s experiment.
Please place all your personal belongings away and switch off your phones and other mobile devices so
we can have your complete attention. DO NOT socialize or talk during the experiment.
It is very important that you do not touch the computer until you are instructed to do so. When you are
told to use the computer, please use it only as instructed. In particular, do not attempt to browse the
web or use programs unrelated to the experiment.
The Experiment
The experiment you participate in today is an experiment in spatial planning, where you and other
participants determine whether a Project gets developed or not. At the end of the experiment, you are
paid for your participation in cash. Each of you may earn different amounts. The amount you earn
depends on your decisions, chance, and others’ decisions.
You will be using the computer for the entire experiment, and all interaction between you and others
will be through computer terminals. You will interact anonymously and your decisions will only be
stored together with your random ID number. Your name will not be made public, neither today nor in
the future.
Computer Instruction
We will go through these instructions very slowly and it is important that you follow them. If you have
any questions, raise your hand and your question will be answered so everyone can hear. Again,
please do not hit any keys until you are told to do so.
Overview of the experiment
At the start of the experiment, each of you will be randomly assigned a role, you will be a developer,
owner, or speculator. All roles remain the same throughout today’s experiment; so if you are an
owner in round 1, you remain an owner throughout the experiment. In this experiment, you will play
6 rounds; the first round is a practice round. Your performance in the remaining 5 rounds will
determine your pay. One of those rounds will be picked at random to determine your payment.
In every round, all players will decide on the development of a plot of land owned by the developer via
a set procedure. The players either implement a Project, or no Project is implemented. The project
decreases the value of all the land owners by different values, as well as increases the value of the developer. Both the value of the land with a Project and the value of the land with No Project are
randomly drawn for each owner and the developer in each round.
The developer and the owners pay taxes to the tax authority as a proportion of the value they
declare their property to be worth. All players in the experiment own shares in the tax revenue
earned by the tax authority: the developer gets 30 shares, an owner gets 6 shares, and a speculator
gets 5 shares. A total of 90 tax shares are circulating among the players. During the experiment,
there is a market where players can buy and sell those tax shares. The value of a tax share is equal to
1/100th of the TOTAL tax revenue raised after the second declaration (see stage “Final Declaration”
below).
Players earn points for each tax share they own at the end of the round, the cash balance not used
to buy shares, the gain or loss due to land speculations, and the value of their plot of land given the
choice on the project if they are developer or owner.

Below, we explain the stages of the experiment in detail.

Phase: “Presentation”
All computer screens have some common elements that we will briefly explain here. The blue bar (see
item 1) at the top shows your role in the experiment at the far left and some information about the
current state of the round. At the far right, you can see the round and phase of the experiment. Every
phase has a time limit, a clock is shown next to the round and phase indication.
Area 2 shows the layout of the land. Your own role and plot of land are highlighted in blue in this area.
All owners and the developer have a value for their plot of land that depends on whether or not the
project is developed. These values are randomly drawn from a uniform distribution in every round.
Area 3 shows the value ranges from which the actual values for all players are drawn, for each role the
minimum and maximum values are indicated. Note that these minimum and maximum values can vary
from session to session, but will remain the same during the session today.
You can see the values used in your session on your computer screen throughout the experiment.
Note that in each round the project is either developed or not. If the project is developed, each player
receives the value of their land with the Project at the end of the round. If the group decides not to
develop the land, each player receives the value of their land under the No Project condition at the end
of the round.
Area 4 (see figure) shows, for each owner and developer privately, their values for your property
when the project is not developed (No Project) and when the project is developed (Project). The
computer will not tell other players what your private value for the land is. In the next phase, the
owners and developer will declare their value for their property under the *No Project* and
*Project* outcomes. The speculators don’t own any property and therefore don’t see these values.

Phase: “Declaration”
The Owners and the Developer are asked to submit their initial declaration of the value for their plot
of land, for BOTH the *No Project* and *Project outcome* in area 5 (see figure below). The value of
the land for each player depends on whether the project is implemented or not. Therefore, the
owners and developer are asked to submit two values, one for when the project is not implemented
and one for when the project is implemented. Declarations are only submitted once you push the
blue button and confirm your choice. If you don’t submit your values, the lowest possible value from
the range ‘No Project’ (see area 3), will be filled in as the declaration for ‘No Project’, and similarly
for the ‘Project’ condition.
Each owner and the developer can only submit their first declaration once per round; repeat
submissions are ignored. Owners and the developer pay a tax equal to 1% (see Area 5; tax bill) of
their initial declared value under the development option that is ultimately chosen. Hence, if the
project is implemented, owners and developers pay 1% of their initial declaration for the ‘project’
option but do not pay a tax over their declaration when the project is not implemented. In area 5
you see how much taxes you pay if you fill in the declaration box.
In area 5 you also see *value percentile*, which tells you what percentage of possible values (for the
properties) from the uniform distribution is below your declaration. This information is also shown
to the speculators in the next phase.
IMPORTANT: At this point of the game, a decision is reached on whether the project is
*implemented* or not. The computer SUMS all the declarations of the six players (5 owners + 1
developer) for EACH condition (NO Project or Project). The condition (Project or No Project) with the
highest sum total of Declarations wins and is chosen.
The next phase starts when (1) all owners have submitted their values, or (2) the timer in the top
right-hand corner has run out.

Phase: “Speculation”
In this phase, ‘Speculators’ can choose to ‘buy’ one or more of the plots of land from the owners and
developer. They can do so by clicking the preferred plot(s) of land, under the CHOSEN CONDITION
(Determined in the previous phase) in Area 6 (see Figure). Speculators see both the declared value
(number in each plot outside of the brackets), and the *value percentile* (the percentage between
brackets) for each plot of land. The percentile shows what percentage of possible values for this plot
of land is below the owner’s declaration. The choice to buy properties of land is registered after you
select the plots, click the blue submit button, and confirm your choice.
If a speculator buys a plot of land, they pay a price equal to the initial declaration of the respective
plot owner under the chosen condition. This price is received by the owner or developer of that plot
of land. Plots of land are automatically sold back to their original owners at the average of the ‘real
value’ to the owners and the declaration of the owner. Speculators thus receive half of the
difference between this ‘real value’ and the initial declaration for every plot they bought. If several
speculators buy the same plot in a round, they share this value. If their plot is bought, owners and
developer thus pay half of the difference between their real valuation and their declaration. In short,
as a speculator, you lose value if you buy a property where the owner or developer declared a higher
value than their real value. However, as a speculator, you earn value if you buy a property where the
owner or developer declared a lower value than their real value.
The next phase starts when (1 ) all speculators have submitted their buy requests, or (2) the timer in
the top right-hand corner has run out. As a speculator, you will neither earn nor lose points if you
choose not to buy any property under the chosen condition.

Phase: “ Market”
At this point, all players will participate in a market in which shares can be traded (see the figure).
Each player has shares in the market; the developer has 30 shares, each of the 5 owners has 6 shares
and each of the 6 speculators has 5 shares. There are a total of 90 shares that can be traded.
After the market, the experiment asks the developer and owners to make a final declaration for the
value of their plot of land with the chosen condition (Project or No Project). The computer then
levies a tax of 33% of this declaration, and another round of speculations follows. Each share has a
value equal to 1/100 of the total Tax Income based on the final declarations.

To give all players an idea of what the tax share is worth in that round, the computer gives both a
private and a public signal to each player in Area 8.
All players see the *same* public signal of the value of the tax shares for each market. This value is
based on the *initial declarations* made by the owners and developer. If the owners and developers
all declare the *REAL* value of their properties, the public signal perfectly predicts the share value in
the market. If they do not declare their *REAL* value, the public signal will be off proportionally to
the degree the owners don’t declare their *REAL* values.
Each player also gets a private signal about the value of the share. The private signal is a noisy signal
of the true value of a share in the chosen condition. The private signal is determined by the value of
the tax shares when all players declare their *REAL VALUES* + an error term. The error term is
drawn randomly and individually for each player and is between 5% below or 5% above the average
of these *REAL* values over the experiment.
Additionally, you will see the contracts that have been closed, as well as the ‘median price’ of the
last seven trades in Area 9.

Trading
In the Market phase, all players can trade tax shares by buying or selling tax shares.
How to offer to Sell a share;
-The ‘asks’ (offer to sell) can be done in area 10 (see figure) by typing in the value you would
like to receive for the share in that market and pushing the blue ‘Ask’ button.
- After that the ‘offer to sell’ your share (ask) appears in the area under Area 10
- At that point, you did not sell your share yet. A buyer has to accept your offer first.
How to offer to buy a share;
- The ‘bids’ (offer to buy) can be done in area 11, by typing the value you would like to pay for
a share and pressing the blue ‘Bid’ button.
- After that your ‘offer to buy’ (Bid) a share appears above area 11.
- At that point, you did not buy a share yet. A seller has to accept your offer first.

Offers that you made (either to buy or sell) are marked with an *. You can remove an offer that has
not been accepted yet by pressing the “Remove Ask” or “Remove Bid” button.
How to immediately buy or sell a share;
You can also accept an offer to buy or sell a share at the listed price by clicking the “Buy @” or “Sell
@” buttons in Area 12. A player that buys or sells a share in this way, automatically receives the best
available offer of all offers that are outstanding at that time.

You can see the amount of cash and shares that you have available in the areas without a number at
any time. You can make as many offers as you like. This market will last for 4 and a half minutes and
all participants move to the next phase at the end of this period.

Phase: “Final Declaration”
In the Final declaration phase, the Owners and developers are asked to submit their final declaration
of the value of their property in Area 13 (see figure below). Note that owners now only have to
declare their valuation for the development that took place. If the project is implemented, they
declare a value of their land with the project; if the project is not implemented, they declare a value
of their land for no project.
In the figure, you see the ‘no project’ is chosen in the earlier declaration phase (yellow band). The
values declared here can be different from the initial declarations. You will see the declaration you
have made in the initial declaration in area 13. There you can change that value if you wish to do so.
Declarations are only submitted once you push the blue button and confirm your choice. If you don’t
submit your value, the lowest possible value from the range of the chosen condition (‘No Project’ in
this example) will be filled in as the declaration.
Please note that taxes are substantially higher here: owners and developer pay 33% of their declared
value as a tax in this declaration phase.
In area 14, you will see if speculators bought your property based on the first declaration and what
the result is of that transaction.
The next phase starts when (1) all owners have submitted their values, or (2) the timer in the top
right-hand corner has run out.

Phase: “Final Speculation”
The final speculation repeats the first speculation. Speculators’ can choose to ‘buy’ one or more of
the plots of land from the owners and developer. Speculators see both the declared value (number
in each plot outside of the brackets) and the *value percentile* (the percentage between brackets)
for each plot of land. The percentile shows what percentage of possible values for this plot of land is
below the owner’s declaration. The choice to buy properties of land is registered after you select the
plots, click the blue submit button, and confirm your choice.
If a speculator buys a plot of land, they pay a price equal to the final declaration of the respective
plot owner under the chosen condition. This price is received by the owner or developer of that plot
of land. Plots of land are automatically sold back to their original owners at the average of the ‘real
value’ to the owners and the owner's declaration. Speculators thus receive half of the difference
between this ‘real value’ and the final declaration for every plot they bought. If several speculators
buy the same plot in a round, they share this value. If their plot is bought, owners and developer
thus pay half of the difference between their real valuation and their final declaration. In short, as a
speculator, you lose value if you buy a property where the owner or developer declared a higher
value than their real value. However, as a speculator, you earn value if you buy a property where the
owner or developer declared a lower value than their real value.
The next phase starts when (1) all speculators have submitted their buy requests, or (2) the timer in
the top-right-hand corner has run out. As a speculator, you will neither earn nor lose points if you
choose not to buy any property under the chosen condition.

Phase: “Results”
Once the final “Speculation” phase is done, the computer collects the tax revenue and the owners of
tax shares receive their share of the tax revenue. Players are shown their results for the round they
just played, a new round starts after the timer runs out. All players can see the points they earned in
each phase, as well as the final “total earnings” in that round, in area 16.

After the “results” phase the game moves on to the next round. In total, there are 6 rounds, including
the first practice round which does not count toward your final payment. From the last 5 rounds that
are eligible for payment, one will be chosen at random.
Phase: “Final Results”

On the final results page (after the experiment is done), the amount you earned in “points”, as well
as the “final Euro Amount” (Area 17) will be shown. The final Euro amount is calculated by taking the
points earned, adding base points that depend on your role, and dividing this by a fixed exchange
rate that depends on your role. The show-up fee is added to this total to make your payment.

The experimenters will call the payment token (Area 18), and you will receive your payment.
Make sure that you fill out the payment token and final amount, as well as all other information on
the payment receipt before collecting your payment.
Please fill out the survey questions before collecting your payment.
Base points and exchange rates used in this session are the following:
1) owners get 200.000 basepoints with an exchange rate of 20.000,
2) speculators get 400.000 basepoints with an exchange rate of 20.000
3) the developer gets 0 basepoints with an exchange rate of 50.000
Login Instructions
You will now be asked to pick an envelope in which you will find the number of the computer where
you will sit.
Once seated, log in with your student account, open the Edge browser and type in the following:
https://yary.eu